In the middle of our life's journey
I found myself in a dark forest,
for the straight path was lost.
Alas, it's hard to say which one it was
this wild, harsh and strong forest
that renews fear in thought!
It is so bitter that it is little more than death;
but to discuss the good I found there,
I will tell you about the other things I noticed there.
I don't know how to explain how I entered it,
he was so sleepy at that point
that I abandoned the true path.
But then I reached the foot of a hill,
where that valley ended
that my broken heart was afraid of,
I looked up and saw his back
already clothed in the rays of the planet
who leads others straight down every street.
Then the fear was a little quiet,
which had lasted in the lake of my heart
the night I spent with so much pity.
And like those who with breathless energy,
came out of the ocean to the shore,
turns to the perilous water and gazes,
so my soul, which still fled,
he turned back to admire the pace
which never left a person alive.
After I rested my limp body a little,
I set off again along the deserted beach,
so that the firm foot was always the lowest.
And here, almost at the beginning of the climb,
a light loin that lends a lot,
which was covered in maculate hair;
and don't leave in front of my face,
in fact it hindered my path a lot,
for I was turned several times to return.
The weather had been since the beginning of the morning,
and the sun rose upwards with those stars
who were with him when divine love
moves those beautiful things first;
so that it was a reason for me to hope well
of that fair skin
the hour of time and the sweet season;
but it didn't scare me
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
It seemed that he was coming against me
with head held high and with rabid hunger,
so much so that it seemed as if the air was trembling.
And a she-wolf, who craves everything
she seemed laden in his thinness,
and many people have already made miserable lives,
this brought me so much trouble
with the fear that goes out of sight of him,
that I lost hope of heights.
And who is he who willingly buys,
and the time arrives that will cause him to lose,
who cries and becomes sad at every thought of him;
the beast without peace made me like this,
who, coming towards me, little by little
it haunted me where the sun is silent.
While I was ruined in a low place,
it was offered before my eyes
who for a long silence seemed dim.
When I saw this man in the great desert,
"Pity me," I cried to him,
"whatever you are, shadow or man!".
He replied to me: "I am not a man, I was already a man,
and my relatives were Lombard,
Mantoans for their homeland both.
I was born sub Iulio, even if it was late,
and I lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of false and lying gods.
Poet I was, and I sang of that right
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
then the proud Ilïón was burned.
But why do you return to such boredom?
why don't you climb the delightful mountain
what is the beginning and cause of all joy?".
"Now you are that Virgil and that source
what do you say about speaking so wide a river?",
I replied to him with a shameful frown.
"O honor and light of the other poets,
Let me appreciate long study and great love
which made me look for your volume.
You are my teacher and my author,
you are only the one from whom I took
the beautiful stylus that did me honor.
See the beast for which I turned;
help me from her, famous sage,
that makes my veins and wrists tremble."
"It is better for you to continue your journey",
he replied, when he saw me weeping,
"if you want to escape from this wild place;
because this beast, for which you cry out,
does not let others pass his way,
but it prevents him so much that it kills him;
and has such an evil and cruel nature,
that never fills the longing desire,
and after the meal he is hungrier than before.
There are many animals to which he marries,
and they will be even more, until the veltro
will come, which will make her die in pain.
This will not feed on earth or pewter,
but wisdom, love and virtues,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
Blessings to that humble Italy
for which the virgin Cammilla died,
Euryalus and Turnus and Nisus of wounds.
He will chase her away from every villa,
until he has put her back in hell,
there where envy first departs.
So I think and discern for your sake
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and taken from here to an eternal place;
where you will hear the desperate cries,
you will see the ancient sorrowful spirits,
that everyone cries out for the second death;
and you will see those who are happy
in the fire, because they hope to come
whenever it is for the blessed people.
Then if you want to go up there,
soul will be more worthy of this than me:
I will leave you with her when I leave;
because that emperor who reigns up there,
because I was rebellious against his law,
he doesn't want me to come to his city.
In all parts he reigns and reigns there;
there is his city and his high seat:
oh happy he who chooses there!".
And I to him: "Poet, I call upon you
for that God that you did not know,
so that I escape this evil and worse,
that you take me where you said now,
so that I see the door of Saint Peter
and the color of which you are so sad."
Then he moved, and I followed him.
