In the middle of our life's journey
I found myself in a dark forest,
for the straight way was lost.
Alas, what was that? It's hard.
This wild and rugged forest is strong
that in the thought revives fear!
So bitter that little is more death;
but to deal with the good that I found there,
I'll tell you about the other things I have supplies for you.
I don't know how to laugh about it.
So full of sleep at that point
that I abandoned the true way.
But then I was at the foot of a hill that came,
where that valley ended
that my heart was afraid,
I looked up and saw his shoulders
already dressed in the rays of the planet
who leads others straight to ogne calle.
Then there was fear a little like this,
in the lake of my heart
The night I spent so mercifully.
And like those who with eagerness,
out of the pelagic to the shore,
turns to the perilous and wayward water,
so my soul, which was still fleeing,
He turned back and watched the step
who never left a person alive.
Then he laid his body down a little,
taken away by the deserted plague,
So the still foot was always the lowest.
And here, almost at the beginning of the alert,
a light loin and lends much,
which was covered with spotted hair;
and they departed not before my face,
Indeed, he so vexed my way,
I was about to return several times.
It was from the beginning of the morning,
And the sun climbed up with those stars
who were with him when divine love
moved those beautiful things before;
It was good to hope
of that fair to the gaetta pelle
the time of time and the sweet season;
But I'm not afraid
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
This seemed to be against me.
with the high test and with furious hunger,
so that the air seemed to tremble.
And a wolf, who craves all
He looked like a carcass in his thinness,
and many nations were already living grams,
this gave me so much heaviness
with fear that comes out of his sight,
I lost hope of heights.
And what is it that willingly acquires,
and giugne 'l tempo che perdere lo face,
in all his thoughts weeps and is afraid;
So the beast made me peace,
that, coming up against me, little by little
He sent me back where the sun was silent.
While he was ruining it down there,
before their eyes he offered himself to me
who for a long silence seemed dim.
When I saw him in the great desert,
"Miserable of me," I cried to him,
"whatever you are, or shadow or certain man!"
Answer me: "Not homo, homo I was already,
and my relatives were Lombards,
Mantuani per patrïa both.
I was born under Julius, even though it was late,
and lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that righteous
the son of Anchises, who came from Troy,
Then the superb Ilïón was burned.
Why do you get so bored again?
Why don't you go up the pleasant mountain
which is the beginning and cause of all joy? "
"Now if you are that Virgil and that fountain
What do you think you're talking so far? ',
I answered him shamefully.
"Or of the other poets honor and light,
Give me the long study and the great love
That made me look for your volume.
If you are my master and my author,
You are only the one from whom I removed
The beautiful stylus that honored me.
See the beast for whom I turned;
Help me with her, famous sage,
She makes my veins and wrists tremble."
"You must keep another way."
He replied, then what tears he saw me,
"se vuo' campar d'esto loco savage;
for this beast, for whom thou criest,
does not let others pass in his way,
but so much so that it kills him;
and has such evil and evil nature,
that never defiles the covetousness,
And after the meal he's more hungry than before.
Many are the animals to which he marries,
and more will be, until the veltro
He will come, who will make her die in agony.
He will not eat earth or pewter,
but wisdom, love and virtue,
and his nation shall be between felt and felt.
Of that humble Italy fia salute
for which the virgin Camel died,
Euryalo and Turno and Niso of wounds.
He will chase her away for every villa,
until he has put her back in the world,
That's where the first party starts.
So I think and discern for your self
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and departed therefrom for an external place;
where you will hear the desperate screams,
you will see the ancient sorrowful spirits,
that at the second death each cries;
and you will see colors that are happy
in the fire, because they hope to come
when it is to the blessed people.
A le quai then if you want to go up,
My soul is more worthy than me:
with her I will leave you in my departure;
for the emperor who reigns there,
because he rebelled against his law,
He doesn't want his town to wake up for me.
In all parts it reigns and reigns there;
And there is his city, and his high seat:
Happy is he who elects there! "
And I said to him, "Poet, I want you
for what God you did not know,
that I may flee this evil and worse,
that you take me where you said,
so that I may see the door of Saint Peter
and color that you make so sad."
Then he moved, and I kept them behind.
