In the middle of the journey of our life
I found myself in a dark forest,
because the straight way was lost
Alas, how hard it is to say what it was like!
This wild and rugged and strong forest
that in the thought renews the fear!
So bitter that little is more death;
but to treat of the good that I found there,
I will tell of the other things that I saw there.
I don't know how to explain how I entered it,
So full of sleep at that point
that I abandoned the true way.
But then I reached the foot of a hill,
where that valley ended,
which had filled my heart with fear,
I looked up and saw his shoulders
already dressed with the rays of the planet
Who leads others straight through every street.
Then the fear was a little quiet,
Which in the lake of my heart had lasted
the night that I spent with so much pity.
And like those who with labored breath,
came out of the ocean to the shore,
turns to the perilous water and gazes,
so my soul, which still fled,
He turned back to look at the pass
that never left a living person.
Then after I had rested my weary body a little,
I resumed my way along the deserted shore,
so that the firm foot was always the lowest.
And behold, almost at the beginning of the slope,
a light and very swift she-wolf,
which was covered with spotted hair;
and it did not depart from before my face,
Instead it hindered my way so much,
That I was to return several times turned.
Time was from the beginning of the morning,
and the sun was rising up with those stars
Who were with him when the divine love
moved those beautiful things at first;
So that to good hope was the cause for me
Of that fair to the fair skin
the hour of time and the sweet season;
but not so that fear did not give me
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
He seemed to come against me,
With the head high and with furious hunger,
So that it seemed that the air trembled.
And a she-wolf, who of all lusts
seemed laden not in her thinness,
and had already made many people live in misery,
this gave me so much heaviness
with the fear that came out of her sight
that I lost the hope of the height.
And what is he who willingly acquires,
and reaches the time that makes him lose,
who in all his thoughts cries and becomes sad;
such the beast without peace made me,
Who, coming towards me, little by little
pushed me back to where the sun is silent.
While I was ruining in a low place,
before my eyes was offered
Who for long silence seemed dim.
When I saw this man in the great desert,
"Mercy on me," I cried to him,
"whatever you are, or shadow or certain man!"
He answered me: "Not man, I was already a man,
and my relatives were Lombards,
mantuans by homeland both."
I was born sub Iulio, even though it was late,
and I lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of the false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that righteous
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
after the proud Ilión was burned.
But why do you return to such boredom?
Why do you not climb the delightful mountain
which is the beginning and cause of all joy?"
"Now are you that Virgil and that fountain
What do you spread to speak so wide a river?"
I answered him with a shameful brow.
"O honor and light of the other poets,
let the long study and the great love
That made me seek your volume.
You are my master and my author,
you are only the one from whom I took
the beautiful style that has done me honor.
See the beast for which I turned;
help me from her, famous sage,
For she makes my veins and wrists tremble."
You must take another journey
he replied, when he saw me weeping,
"if you want to escape from this wild place;"
for this beast, for which you cry,
does not let others pass by his way,
but so much so that it kills him;
and has a nature so wicked and vile,
That it never fills the greedy desire,
and after the meal has more hunger than before.
Many are the animals to which he marries,
and more will be, until the veltro
will come, which will make her die in pain.
He will not eat earth or pewter,
but wisdom, love, and virtue,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
Of that humble Italy will be health
for which the virgin Camilla died,
Euryalus and Turnus and Nisus of wounds.
He will hunt her through every villa,
until he has put her back in hell,
there where envy first departs.
Therefore, I think and discern through your face
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and lead you from here to eternal place;
where you will hear the desperate cries,
you will see the ancient sorrowful spirits,
that at the second death each cries;
and you will see those who are content
in the fire, because they hope to come
whenever it may be to the blessed people.
To which then if you will want to ascend,
the soul will be to that more worthy than me
with her I will leave you in my departure;
For that emperor who reigns up there,
because I was rebellious against his law,
He does not want me to come to his city.
In all parts he reigns and reigns there;
There is his city and his high seat:
oh, happy is he whom he elects here!
And I to him: "Poet, I beg you
for that God whom you did not know,
so that I may flee this evil and worse
that you lead me there where you said
so that I may see the door of Saint Peter
and those whom you make so sad.
Then he moved, and I followed him.
