In the middle of the journey of our life
I found myself in a dark forest,
because the straight way was lost.
Alas, how hard it is to tell what that forest was
This wild and rugged and strong forest
that renews the fear in the thought!
So bitter that little is more death;
but to treat of the good that I found there,
I will tell of the other things that I saw there.
I do not know well how I entered there,
so full of sleep at that point
that I abandoned the true way.
But then I reached the foot of a hill,
there where that valley ended
that had filled my heart with fear,
I looked up and saw his shoulders
already clothed with the rays of the planet
Who leads others straight through every street.
Then the fear was a little quieted,
which had lasted in the lake of my heart
the night I spent with so much pity.
And like those who, with exhausted breath,
came out of the ocean to the shore,
turns to the perilous water and gazes,
so my soul, which still was fleeing,
turned back to look at the path
which never left a person alive.
Then, when I had rested my weary body a little,
I resumed my way along the deserted shore,
so that the firm foot was always the lowest.
And behold, almost at the beginning of the slope,
a light and very swift lynx,
which was covered with spotted hair;
and it did not depart from before my face,
indeed, it hindered so much my path,
that I was about to turn back many times.
It was from the beginning of the morning,
and the sun was rising with those stars
who were with him when divine love
moved those beautiful things before;
so that it was a cause for me to hope well
Of that fair to the fair skin
The hour of time and the sweet season;
but not so much that fear did not give me
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
He seemed to come against me,
with its head high and with angry hunger,
so that it seemed that the air trembled.
And a she-wolf, who of all desires
seemed loaded in her thinness,
and many people made already live miserable,
This one gave me so much gravity
with the fear that came out of her sight,
that I lost the hope of the height.
And what is he who willingly acquires,
and the time comes that makes him lose it,
who in all his thoughts weeps and is sad;
such did the beast without peace make me,
that, coming towards me, little by little
pushed me back to where the sun is silent.
While I was ruining in a low place,
before my eyes was offered to me
Who for long silence seemed dim.
When I saw this man in the great desert,
"Mercy on me," I cried to him,
"whatever you are, or shadow or certain man!"
He answered me: "I am not a man; I was once a man,
and my relatives were Lombards,
mantuans by homeland, both of them.
I was born sub Iulio, even though it was late,
and I lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of the false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that righteous
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
after the proud Ilión was burned.
But why do you return to such boredom?
why don't you climb the delightful mountain,
what is the beginning and cause of all joy?".
"Now, are you that Virgil and that fountain
what do you say about speaking so wide a river?",
I answered him with a shameful brow.
"O honor and light of the other poets,
let the long study and the great love
That made me seek your volume.
You are my master and my author,
you are only the one from whom I took
the beautiful style that has done me honor.
See the beast for which I turned;
help me from her, famous sage,
that she makes my veins and wrists tremble."
"To you, it is necessary to undertake another journey,"
he replied, when he saw me weeping,
"if you want to escape from this wild place;
for this beast, for which you cry,
does not let others pass in his way,
but it prevents him so much that it kills him;
and has a nature so wicked and cruel,
that it never fills the greedy desire,
and after the meal, it is hungrier than before.
Many are the animals to which it mates,
and more will be yet, until the greyhound
will come, which will make her die in pain.
This will not feed on earth or pewter,
but wisdom, love, and virtue,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
From that humble Italy will be salvation,
for which the virgin Camilla died,
Euryalus and Turnus and Nisus of wounds.
He will chase her through every town,
until he has put her back in hell,
there where envy first departs.
Wherefore I think and discern by thy self
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and lead you from here to eternal place;
where you will hear the desperate cries,
you will see the ancient sorrowful spirits,
who cry out for the second death;
and you will see those who are content
in the fire, because they hope to come
when it is to the blessed people.
To which, then, if you will want to ascend,
a soul will be more worthy of this than me;
with her, I will leave you in my departure;
for the emperor who reigns there,
because I was rebellious against his law,
does not want anyone to come to his city for me.
In all parts he reigns, and there he rules;
There is his city and his high seat:
oh happy he whom he chooses there!".
And I to him: "Poet, I ask you
for that God whom you did not know,
so that I may flee this evil and worse,
that you lead me there where you said now,
so that I may see the door of Saint Peter
and those whom you make so sad".
Then he moved, and I followed him.
