In the middle of our life's journey
I found myself in a dark forest,
for the straight way was lost.
Ah, as for saying what it was, it's hard
This wild and rugged and strong forest
That fear renews in thought!
So bitter is it that little is more death;
but to treat of the good that I found there,
I will tell you of the other things that I have in store for you.
I don't know how to tell you how I got into it,
He was so full of sleep at that point
That I forsook the true way.
But when I was at the foot of a hill I had reached,
Where that valley ended
That my heart was filled with fear,
I looked up and saw his back
Already clothed in the rays of the planet
Who leads others straight through every street.
Then the fear was a little quiet,
That in the lake of my heart had lasted
The night I spent with so much pity.
And like those who with breathless slit,
Out of the lake to the shore,
He turns to the perilous water and wades away,
Thus my soul, which still fled,
He turned back to look at the pass
who never left a person alive.
When I have laid down my body a little,
Taken back to the deserted beach,
so that the firm foot was always the lowest.
And behold, as if at the beginning of the steep slope,
a light loin that lends itself very well,
that it was covered with spotted hair;
And there was no departure before my face,
nay, it impeded my path so much,
That I was about to return again and again and again.
It was from the beginning of the morning,
And the sun rose up with those stars
Who were with him when divine love
He moved those beautiful things from before;
so that I was the cause of good hope
Of that fair at La Gaetta Pelle
the time of time and the sweet season;
But it wasn't so that it didn't frighten me
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
It seemed as if he were coming against me
with a high head and with angry hunger,
so that it seemed as if the air trembled.
And a she-wolf, who longs for all
He looked like a load in his thinness,
And many people have already made miserable lives,
This one gave me so much gravity
with the fear that it will go out of his sight,
That I lost all hope of height.
And what is it that you willingly acquire,
And the time comes that makes it waste,
Who weeps and grieves in all his thoughts;
Such was the beast made me without peace,
Who, coming to meet me, little by little
He sheltered me where the sun is silent.
While I was ruining in a low place,
before my eyes was offered
some for a long silence seemed dim.
When I saw this man in the great desert,
"Mercy on me," I cried to him,
"Whatever thou art thou, O shadow or certain man!"
I answered: "Not a man, a man I was before,
And my relatives were Lombards,
Mantoani for Patrïa Ambedui.
I was born sub Iulio, even though it was late,
And I lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of the false and lying gods.
A poet I was, and I sang of that righteous man
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
after the proud Ilïón was burned.
But why do you go back to such boredom?
Why don't you climb the delightful mountain
which is the beginning and cause of all joy?"
"Now art thou that Virgil and that fountain
What do you spread to speak so wide a river?"
I answered him with a shameful brow.
"O honour and light of the other poets,
Sift through my long study and my great love
That made me seek your volume.
Thou art my teacher and my author,
You are the only one from whom I took
the beautiful style that has done me honor.
Behold the beast through which I turned;
Help me from her, famous sage,
that she makes my veins and wrists tremble."
"It behooves thee to keep another journey",
He answered, then he saw me weeping,
"If you want to live in this wild place;
for this beast, for which thou cries,
he does not let others pass in his way,
but it kills him so much that he kills him;
And his nature is so wicked and wicked,
That never fills the longing desire,
And after the meal he is hungrier than before.
Many are the animals to which he marries,
And more will they be, until the veltro
it will come, and it will make her die in pain.
He shall not eat the earth or pewter,
but wisdom, love and virtue,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
Of that humble Italy will be health
for which the virgin Cammilla died,
Euryalus and Turnus and Nisus of ferute.
He will hunt her through every villa,
Till he has put her back into hell,
Thither whence it first departs.
Wherefore I think and discern by thy self
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
And drawn from here to an eternal place;
Where you'll hear the desperate screams,
You'll see the ancient sorrowful spirits,
That at the second death every one cries out;
And you'll see those who are happy
in the fire, because they hope to come
when it is to the blessed people.
To which then, if thou wilt go up,
A soul will be more worthy of this than I am:
with her I will leave you in my departure;
for that emperor who reigns yonder above,
for I rebelled against his law,
He does not want me to come to his city.
In all parts he reigns, and there he rules;
There is his city and the high seat:
O happy is he who chooses there!"
And I said to him: "Poet, I call on you
for that God whom you did not know,
so that I may flee from this evil and worse,
That you lead me to where you said now,
so that I see the door of St. Peter's
and those to whom you make so sad."
Then he moved, and I followed them.
