In the midst of the journey of our life
I found myself through a forest dark,
For the straight way was lost.
Ahi how hard it is to say what it was
This forest wild and rugged and strong
That in thought rekindles fear!
So bitter is it that little is more death;
But to treat of the good that I found there,
I'll tell of the other things I have stored there.
I cannot well tell how I entered it,
So full of sleep was I at that point
That the true pathway I abandoned.
But when I was at the foot of a hill arrived,
There where that valley ended
Which with fear had compacted my heart,
I looked upward, and saw its shoulders
Clothed already with the rays of the planet
Which leads upright others by every street.
Then was the fear a little quenched,
Which in the lake of my heart had lasted
The night that I passed with such pity.
And like those who with weary pace
Coming out of the pelagus to the shore,
Turns himself to the perilous and wary water,
So my soul, that still was fleeing,
Turned backward to gaze upon the passage
Which never yet left a living person.
Then when I had laid the slack body a little,
I resumed my way upon the deserted plain,
So that my foot was always the lowest still.
And behold, almost at the beginning of the steep,
A loin light and lends much,
Which of dappled hair was covered;
And did not depart before my face,
Nay, it impeded so much my path,
That I was to return several times turned.
Time was from the beginning of the morning,
And the sun was rising with those stars
Who were with him when the love divine
Moved from before those beautiful things;
So that to good hope was the cause for me
Of that fair to the fair skin
The hour of time and the sweet season;
But not so that fear did not give me
The sight that appeared to me of a lion.
This one seemed to come against me
With head'high and with rabid hunger,
So that it seemed as if the air trembled with it.
And a she-wolf, who of all lusts
Seemed dear in her leanness,
And many a people made already to live fat,
This one brought me so much of gravity
With the fear that went out of her sight,
That I lost hope of the height.
And what is he who willingly acquires,
And comes the time that he loses it,
Who in all his thoughts weeps and is distressed;
Such made me the beast without peace,
Who, coming towards me, little by little
Turned me back to where the sun is silent.
While I was ruining in a low place,
Before mine eyes was offered to me
Who for long silence seemed dim.
When I saw him in the great desert,
"Miserere of me," I cried to him,
"Whatever thou art, either shadow or man certain!"
He answered me, "Non omo, omo already I was,
And my kinsmen were Lombards,
Mantuans by patria both of them.
Nacqui sub Iulio, even as late as it was,
And lived in Rome under the good Augustus
In the time of the false and lying gods.
Poet was I, and I sang of that righteous
Anchises' son, who came from Troy,
After the proud Ilion was fought.
But why dost thou return to such boredom?
Why dost thou not ascend the delightful mount
Which is the beginning and cause of all joy?"
"Now art thou that Virgil and that fountain
Who spread of speech so wide a river?"
I answered him with shameful brow.
"O of the other poets honour and light,
Show me the long study and the great love
That made me seek thy volume.
Thou art my master and my author,
Thou art only the one from whom I took
The beautiful style that did me honour.
See the beast for whom I turned me;
Help me from her, famous sage,
For she makes my veins and wrists tremble."
"To thee it convieneth to hold other way."
He answered, then that he saw me weeping,
"if thou wilt camp from this wild place;
For this beast, for whom thou criest,
Does not let others pass by his way,
But so much 'mped him that he kills him;
And he hath such a wicked and righteous nature,
That he never empowers the covetous desire,
And after his meal has more hunger than before.
Many are the animals to which he bewails,
And more shall they be, till the veltro
Will come, that will make her die with grief.
These shall not feed earth nor pewter,
But wisdom, love, and virtue,
And his nation shall be between felt and felt.
Of that humble Italy shall be health
For which the virgin Cammilla died,
Euryalus and Turno and Niso of wounds.
These shall chase her for ogne villa,
Till he shall put her back into hell,
There whence she first departeth.
Whence I for thy me think and discern
That thou follow me, and I will be thy guide,
And draw thee from thence to an eternal place;
Where thou shalt hear the desperate cries,
thou shalt see the ancient sorrowful spirits,
Who to the second death each cries out;
And thou shalt see those who are contented
In the fire, because they hope to come
Whenever it may be to the blessed peoples.
To whom then if thou wilt ascend,
Soul shall be to that more worthy than I:
With her I will leave thee in my departure;
For that emperor who there above reigns,
Because I was rebellious to his law,
Wills not that to his city for me thou shouldst come.
In all parts he reigns, and there he rules;
There is his city and his high seat:
O happy he who elects there!"
And I to him: "Poet, I pray thee
For that God whom thou knewest not,
That I may escape this evil and worse,
That thou bring me thither where now thou saidst,
That I may behold the door of Saint Peter
And those to whom thou makest so much mischief."
Then he moved, and I kept behind them.
