In the middle of the journey of our life
I found myself in a dark forest,
because I had lost the straight path.
Oh, how difficult it is to describe
this wild, harsh, and strong forest,
which renews the fear in my thought!
It is so bitter that death is but little more;
but to treat of the good that I found there,
I will tell of the other things that I saw there.
I cannot well tell you how I entered there,
so full of sleep was I at that point
that I abandoned the true path.
But when I arrived at the foot of a hill,
there where that valley ended
which had pierced my heart with fear,
I looked up and saw its shoulders
already clothed with the rays of the planet
that leads others straight through every road.
Then the fear was somewhat quieted,
which had lasted in the lake of my heart
the night that I spent with such pity.
And as he who with panting breath,
having gone out of the ocean to the shore,
turns to the dangerous water and looks at it,
thus my soul, which still fled,
turned behind to look again at the passage
that never yet left anyone alive.
Then, when I had rested my weary body a little,
I resumed my way along the deserted shore,
so that my right foot was always the lowest.
And behold, almost at the beginning of the slope,
a leopard light and very quick,
that was covered with spotted fur;
and it did not part from before my face,
instead it prevented my journey so much,
that I was about to turn back many times.
It was the beginning of the morning,
and the sun was rising with those stars
that were with him when the divine love
the beautiful things moved first,
so that the beast with the gay skin
was a cause for me to hope well.
the hour of the time and the sweet season;
but not so much that fear did not give me
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
This one seemed to come against me
with his head high and angry hunger,
so that it seemed that the air trembled.
And a she-wolf, that with all desires
seemed laden in the her leanness,
and many people made already live miserable,
this offered me so much of weight,
with the fear that came out of her sight,
that I lost the hope of the height.
And like one who willingly acquires,
and the time comes that makes him lose it,
who in all his thoughts cries and saddens;
such made me the beast without peace,
that coming towards me, little by little,
pushed me back there where the sun is silent.
While I was falling into a low place,
before my eyes was offered to me
someone who seemed weak from long silence.
When I saw this one in the great desert,
"Have mercy on me," I cried to him,
"whether you are a shadow or a certain man!"
He replied to me, "Not a man, but a man I once was,
and my parents were Lombards,
both from homeland Mantua."
I was born under Julius Caesar, even though it was late,
and I lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of the false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that just
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
after proud Ilium was burned.
But you, why do you return to so much boredom?
why don't you climb the delightful mountain?
that is the beginning and cause of all joy."
"Now are you that Virgil and that fountain
that spreads of speaking so wide river?"
I replied to him with ashamed forehead.
"O honor and light of the other poets,
may the long study and the great love
that has made me seek your volume."
You are my teacher and my author,
you are only he from whom I took
the beautiful style that has made me honor.
See the beast for whom I turned;
help me from her, famous wise man,
that she makes me tremble my veins and wrists."
"It is necessary for you to take another journey,"
he replied, when he saw me weeping,
"if you wish to live in this savage place;
because this beast, for which you cry,
does not let anyone pass through its way,
but so much it prevents him that it kills him;
and has a nature so wicked and evil,
that it never fills the greedy desire,
and after the meal it has more hunger than before.
Many are the creatures with which it resembles,
and more will there be still, until the greyhound
will come, who will make it die with pain.
This one will not feed on land or peltry,
but on wisdom, love, and virtue,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
For that humble Italy will be salvation
for which died the virgin Camilla,
Eurialo and Turnus and Nisus of wounds.
This one will chase her through every town,
until he has sent her back to hell,
whence primal envy set her loose.
Therefore, for your own sake, I think and discern
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and I will draw you from here through eternal place;
where you will hear the desperate cries,
you will see the ancient sorrowful spirits,
that each cries out to the second death;
and you will see those who are content
in the fire, because they hope to come
when that will be to the blessed people.
To which, then, if you will want to climb,
a soul will be more worthy of that than I:
with her I will leave you in my departure;
because that emperor who reigns up there,
because I was rebellious to his law,
does not want that one comes into his city through me.
In all parts He rules and there He reigns;
there is His city and His high throne:
oh happy he whom He elects there!"
And I to him: "Poet, I ask you
for that God that you did not know,
so that I flee this evil and worse,
that you lead me there where you said now,
so that I may see the gate of Saint Peter
and those whom you make so sad."
Then he moved, and I followed him.
