In the middle of the journey of our life
I found myself in a dark wood
because the straight way was lost
Ah, how hard it is to tell what it was like
this wild, harsh and strong forest
that renews the fear in the mind!
It is so bitter that it is almost death;
but in order to treat of the good that I found there,
I will tell of the other things that I saw there.
I do not know well how I entered there,
so full of sleep was I at that point
that I abandoned the true way.
But then when I had reached the foot of a hill,
there where that valley ended
that had filled my heart with fear,
I looked up and saw its shoulders
already clothed in the rays of the planet
that leads others straight through every path.
Then the fear was a little quiet,
that had lasted in the lake of my heart
the night that I passed with so much pity.
And like one who, with labored breath,
having emerged from the deep to the shore,
turns to the perilous water and gazes,
so my soul, which was still fleeing,
turned back to look at the path
that never left any living person.
Then, after I had rested my weary body for a while,
I resumed my way along the deserted shore,
so that the foot that was planted was always the lowest.
And behold, almost at the beginning of the slope,
a light and very swift leopard,
which was covered with spotted fur;
and did not leave me in front of my face,
indeed it hindered my journey so much,
that I was about to turn back more than once.
It was the beginning of the morning,
and the sun was rising with those stars
that were with him when divine love
first moved those beautiful things;
so that it was a cause for me to hope well
of that beast with the joyful skin
the hour of the season and the sweet season;
but not so much that it did not give me fear
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
This one seemed to come against me
with its head high and with angry hunger,
so that it seemed that the air trembled from it.
And a she-wolf, who of all desires
seemed laden in her leanness,
and many people she already made live in sorrow,
this one gave me so much weight
with the fear that came out of her sight,
that I lost the hope of the height.
And as is one who willingly acquires,
and the time arrives that makes him lose it,
who in all his thoughts weeps and is sad;
such did the beast without peace make me,
that, coming to meet me, little by little
it drove me back to where the sun is silent.
While I was falling to a low place,
before my eyes I was offered
who for long silence seemed faint.
When I saw this man in the great desert,
"Have mercy on me," I cried to him,
"whoever you are, whether shadow or certain man!".
He replied to me: "Not a man, I was once a man,
and my parents were Lombards,
both Mantuans by birth.
I was born under Julius, even though it was late,
and I lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of the false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that just
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
after the proud Ilium was burned.
But why do you return to so much pain?
why don't you climb the delightful mountain
that is the beginning and cause of all joy?"
"Are you that Virgil and that fountain
that pour out a river so wide of speech?"
I answered him with a shameful face.
"O honor and light of the other poets,
may the long study and the great love
that has made me seek your volume."
You are my master and my author,
you are the only one from whom I took
the beautiful style that has honored me.
See the beast by which I turned around;
help me from her, famous sage,
for she makes my veins and wrists tremble."
"For you it is necessary to take another journey",
he replied, after he saw me weeping,
"if you want to escape from this savage place;
for this beast, for which you cry,
does not allow anyone to pass through its way,
but so much it hinders him that it kills him;
and has a nature so wicked and evil,
that it never fills its greedy desire,
and after eating it is hungrier than before.
Many are the animals with which it mates,
and there will be more still, until the greyhound
comes, which will make it die in pain.
This one will not eat earth or tin,
but wisdom, love, and virtue,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
For that humble Italy will be salvation,
for which the virgin Camilla died,
Eurialo and Turnus and Nisus of wounds.
This one will chase it through every town,
until he has put it back in hell,
from whence envy first parted it.
Therefore I for your good think and discern
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and I will lead you from here through eternal place;
where you will hear the desperate cries,
you will see the ancient spirits in pain,
who each cry for the second death;
and you will see those who are content
in the fire, because they hope to come
when, that is, to the blessed people.
To which, then, if you will want to ascend,
a soul will be more worthy of this:
with her I will leave you at my departing;
because that emperor who reigns up there,
because I was rebellious to his law,
does not want that into his city for me one comes.
In all parts he rules and there he reigns;
there is his city and the high seat:
oh happy he whom he chooses there!".
And I to him: "Poet, I beg you
by that God whom you did not know,
so that I may flee this evil and worse,
that you lead me there where you have now said,
so that I may see the gate of Saint Peter
and those whom you make so sad".
Then he moved, and I followed him.
