In the middle of the journey of our life
I found myself in a dark wood,
because the straight way was lost.
Alas, how hard it is to say what it was like!
this wild, harsh, and strong forest
that in the thought renews the fear!
It is so bitter that it is almost death;
but to treat of the good which I found there,
I will tell of the other things which I saw there.
I do not know how to laugh as I entered,
I was so full of sleep at that point
that I abandoned the true path.
But then, when I had reached the foot of a hill,
there where that valley ended
which had afflicted my heart with fear,
I looked up and saw his shoulders
dressed already with the rays of the planet
that leads straight to others through every street.
Then the fear was a little quiet,
that in the lake of the heart it had lasted
the night that I passed with so much pity.
And as one who with exhausted breath,
has left the sea and reached the shore,
turns to the dangerous water and gazes,
so my soul, which was still fleeing,
turned back to gaze at the passage
that had never left any living person.
Then, after I had laid down my weary body for a little while,
I resumed my journey along the deserted shore,
so that my fixed foot was always the lowest.
And behold, almost at the beginning of the ascent,
a light and very swift greyhound,
which was covered with spotted fur,
and it did not depart from in front of my face,
but it prevented my way so much,
that I was about to turn back many times.
It was the beginning of the morning,
and the sun was rising with those stars,
which were with him when the divine love
so beautiful things moved at first;
that was the cause of my hope for good;
of that spotted beast with the spotted skin;
the hour of time and the sweet season;
but not so that fear did not give me
the sight that appeared to me of a lion.
He seemed to come against me
with his head held high and with ravenous hunger,
so that it seemed that the air did not tremble.
And one wolf, that was laden with all cravings,
seemed laden not in her thinness,
and made many people live sad,
this gave me so much heaviness
with the fear that came out of her sight,
that I lost the hope of the height.
And what is he who willingly buys,
and reaches the time that makes him lose,
that in all his thoughts he cries and is sad;
such a beast without peace made me,
that, coming to meet me, little by little,
drove me back to the place where the sun is silent.
While I was falling into a low place,
a man was offered to me before my eyes,
who by long silence seemed faint.
When I saw him in the great desert,
"Have mercy on me", I cried to him,
"What are you, or shadow or man?"
He answered me: "Not man, I was man once,
and my parents were Lombards,
mantuans by homeland both.
I was born under Julius Caesar, even though it was late,
and I lived in Rome under the good Augustus,
in the time of the false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that just
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
after proud Ilium was burned.
But why do you return to so much boredom?
why don't you climb the delightful mountain?
that is the beginning and cause of all joy."
"Now, are you that Virgil and that fountain
that spreads such a wide river of speech?",
I answered him with a shameful forehead.
"O honor and light of the other poets,
help me, long study and great love
that has made me seek your volume.
You are my master and my author,
you are the only one from whom I took
the beautiful style that has made me honored.
See the beast through which I turned;
help me from her, famous sage,
that she makes my veins and wrists tremble."
"You must take another journey",
he replied, when he saw me weeping,
"if you want to survive this wild place;
for this beast, for which you cry,
does not let others pass by his way,
but so much impedes him that he kills him;
and it has a nature so wicked and evil,
that it never fills its greedy desire,
and after its food it has more hunger than before.
Many animals are married to him,
and more will be still, until the greyhound
will come, that he will make her die with grief.
He will not eat earth nor pewter,
but wisdom, love, and virtue,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
The salvation of that humble Italy will be
for which the virgin Camilla died,
Euryalus and Turnus and Nisus of wounds.
He will drive her away through every village,
until he has put her back in hell,
there where envy first took her away.
Therefore, I think and discern through your face
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and I will draw you from here through an eternal place;
where you will hear the desperate screams,
you will see the ancient grieving spirits,
that each cries out to the second death;
and you will see people who are content
in the fire, because they hope to come
when they will be with the blessed people.
To those people, if you will want to rise,
the soul will be to that more worthy than me:
with her I will leave in my departure;
because the emperor who reigns up there,
because I was rebellious to his law,
does not want that I come to his city.
He rules in all parts and governs here.
here is his city and his high seat.
oh, happy is he whom he elects here!"
And I said to him: "Poet, I beg you
for that God whom you did not know,
so that I may flee this evil and worse,
that you lead me there where you said,
so that I may see the gate of Saint Peter
and the people whom you make so sad."
Then he moved, and I followed him.
