In the middle of the journey of our life
I found myself in a dark wood,
Because the straight path was lost.
Ah, how hard it is to tell what it was like,
This wild and harsh and strong wood,
That in thought renews the fear!
It is so bitter that it is almost death;
But in order to speak of the good that I found there,
I will tell of the other things that I saw there.
I do not know well to say how I entered,
So much I was full of sleep in that moment
When I abandoned the true way.
But after I reached the foot of a hill,
Where that valley ended
Which had me with fear in the heart,
I looked up and saw his shoulders
Already dressed by the rays of the planet
Who guides men rightly along every path.
Then the fear was a little calmed,
Which lasted in the lake of the heart
The night that I passed with such pity.
And like that one who with weary breath,
Having come out of the ocean to the shore,
Turns to the dangerous water and looks,
Thus my soul, which still fled,
Turned back to look at the passage
That never left a living person.
After I had put the tired body down for a while,
I took the way again along the deserted shore,
So that the fixed foot was always the lowest.
And behold, almost at the beginning of the slope,
A light and very fast leopard,
Which was covered with spotted fur;
And it did not depart from before my face,
Instead it hindered my way so much,
That I was for turning back more than once turned.
It was time from the beginning of the morning,
And the sun rose up with those stars
Who were with him when the divine love
First moved those beautiful things;
So that to hope well was the reason for me
Of that fierce one with the spotted skin
The hour of the time and the sweet season;
But not so much that I did not feel fears,
When I saw the lion.
That seemed to come against me
With the head high and with furious hunger,
So that it seemed that the air trembled.
And a she-wolf, who seemed to be loaded
With all desires in her thinness,
And who had already made many people live in misfortune,
That put on me so much of weight
With the fear that came out of her face,
That I lost the hope of reaching the height.
And as is he who willingly acquires,
And the time comes that makes him lose,
Who in all his thoughts cries and saddens;
So did the beast without peace make me,
Who, coming to me, little by little
Pushed me back to where the sun is silent.
While I was falling into a low place,
Before my eyes appeared
Who by long silence seemed weak.
When I saw this man in the great desert,
"Have mercy on me," I cried to him,
"Whatever you are, shadow or man certainly!".
He answered me: "Not man, I was already a man,
And my parents were Lombards,
Mantuans by homeland both.
I was born under Julius, even though it was late,
And lived in Rome under the good Augustus
In the time of the false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that just
Son of Anchises, who came from Troy,
After the proud Ilion was burned.
But why do you return to such sorrow?
Why do you not ascend the desired mountain
Which is the beginning and cause of all joy?"
"Now are you that Virgil and that fountain
Which spreads from speech such a large river?"
I answered him with a shameful face.
"O of the other poets honor and light,
May the long study and the great love
That has made me seek your volume be worth it.
You are my master and my author,
You are the only one from whom I took
The beautiful style that has honored me.
See the beast from which I turned;
Help me from her, famous sage,
For she makes my veins and pulses tremble."
To you it is necessary to take another journey,
He replied, when he saw me weeping,
If you want to escape from this wild place;
For this beast, for which you cry,
Does not allow another to pass by its way,
But so much it prevents it that it kills it;
And it has a nature so evil and wicked,
That it never fills the greedy desire,
And after the meal it has more hunger than before.
Many are the animals with which it mates,
And more will be still, until the greyhound
Will come, who will make it die with pain.
This one will not eat earth or pelt,
But wisdom, love, and virtue,
And his nation will be between felt and felt.
Of that humble Italy will be salvation
For which died the virgin Camilla,
Euryale and Turnus and Nisus by wounds.
This one will drive it out through every village,
Until it will be restored to Hell,
From where envy first expelled it.
Therefore I for your good think and discern
That you follow me, and I will be your guide,
And will lead you out of here by eternal place;
Where you will hear the desperate screams,
You will see the ancient spirits sad,
Who to the second death each cries;
And you will see those who are content
In the fire, because they hope to come
When that may be to the blessed peoples.
To which then if you will want to ascend,
A soul will be to this more worthy;
With her I will leave you in my departure;
For that emperor who reigns up there,
Because I was rebellious to his law,
Does not want that to his city through me one comes.
In all parts he rules and there he governs;
There is his city and the high throne;
Oh happy he whom he there chooses!"
And I to him: "Poet, I beg you
For that God whom you did not know,
In order that I may flee this evil and worse,
That you lead me there where now you said,
So that I may see the gate of Saint Peter
And those whom you make so sad."
Then he moved, and I followed him behind.
