The day was going, and the air dark
took away the animals that are on earth
from their labors; and I alone
I was preparing to sustain the war
yes of the journey and yes of the pity,
that will draw back the mind that does not err.
O Muses, O high intellect, now help me;
o mind that wrote that I saw,
here will appear your nobility.
I began: "Poet who guides me,"
look at my virtue if she is powerful,
before that to the high pass you trust me."
You say that of Aeneas the relative,
though still corruptible, to an immortal
century went, and was perceptibly.
Therefore, if the adversary of all evil
was courteous to him, thinking of the high effect
that was to come out of him, and the who and the which
it does not seem unworthy to a man of intellect.
for he was of the soul of Rome and of its empire
in the Empyrean sky for father elected.
the which and the which, to want to say the true,
was established for the holy place
where sits the successor of the greater Peter.
For this journey from which you give him glory,
he heard things that were causes
of his victory and of the papal mantle.
Then the Vessel of Election went there,
to bring back comfort to that faith
that is the beginning of the way of salvation.
But I, why should I come here? Or who grants it?
I am not Aeneas, I am not Paul;
neither I nor others believe me worthy of this.
Therefore, if I abandon myself to the coming,
I fear that the coming may not be foolish.
You are wise; you understand better than I speak.
And what is he who no longer wants what he wanted
and for new thoughts changes his proposal,
so that he takes himself away from all beginning,
such I made myself on that dark hillside,
because, thinking, I consumed the enterprise
which was so quick in the beginning.
"If I have well understood your word,"
replied the shade of the magnanimous one,
"your soul is assailed by cowardice;
which many times weighs down the man
so that it turns him back from an honorable enterprise,
as a false seeing turns a beast back when it sees a shadow.
From this fear so that you may free yourself,
I will tell you why I came and that which I heard
in the first moment that I grieved for you.
I was among those who are suspended,
and a lady called me blessed and beautiful,
such that I asked her to command me.
Her eyes shone more than the star;
and she began to speak to me gently and softly,
with an angelic voice, in her speech:
"O courteous Mantuan soul,
whose fame still endures in the world,
and will endure as long as the world is distant,
my friend, and not of fortune,
is hindered in the deserted plain
so much in his path that he has turned back for fear;
and I fear that he is already so lost,
that I may be too late to come to his aid,
because of what I have heard of him in the sky.
Now move, and with your adorned word
and with that which is needed for his salvation,
help him so that I may be consoled of it.
I am Beatrice who makes you go;
I come from the place where I desire to return;
love moved me, who makes me speak.
When I will be before my Lord,
I will praise you often to him."
She fell silent then, and then I began:
"O woman of virtue, only for whom
the human species exceeds every contentment
of that sky which has smaller its circles,
so much pleases me your command,
that to obey, if it were already, it is to me late;
you do not want more than to open to me your talent.
But tell me the reason that you do not guard yourself
from the descending here down in this center
of the wide place where you burn to return"
"Since you want to know so much inside,
I will tell you briefly," he responded,
"because I do not fear to come here inside.
One must fear only those things
that have the power to do evil to others;
of the others, no, because they are not fearful.
I am made by God, by his grace, such,
that your misery does not touch me,
nor flame of this fire does not assail me.
A gentle woman is in heaven who pities
this hindrance where I send you,
so that hard judgment there above breaks.
This woman asked Lucia in her request
and said: - Now your faithful one has need
of you, and I to you I recommend him.
Lucy, the enemy of every cruel one,
moved, and came to the place where I was,
that I was sitting with the ancient Rachel.
Said: - Beatrice, true praise of God,
because you do not help that one who loved you so much,
who left for you from the vulgar crowd?
Do you not hear the pity of his weeping,
do you not see the death that fights him
on the river where the sea has no boast?
In the world there were never people so quick,
to do their good or to flee their harm,
as I, after so many words spoken,
I came down here from my blessed seat,
trusting in your honest speech,
that honors you and those who have heard it".
After she had spoken to me these words,
she turned her shining eyes, which were filled with tears,
which made me come even sooner.
And I came to you just as she wished:
I lifted you from before that beast
that kept you from walking the short way to the beautiful mountain.
Then: what is it, why, why did you remain,
why so much cowardice flatters your heart,
why you do not have courage and frankness,
after such three blessed women
care for you in the court of heaven,
and my speech so well promises you?
What little flowers, bent and closed by the nocturnal frost,
when the sun whitens them,
straighten themselves all open on their stem,
such did I make myself of my virtue tired,
and so much good courage to my heart ran,
that I began as a frank person:
"Oh pitiful she who helped me!
and you courteous one who obeyed quickly
to the true words that she put to you!
You have disposed my heart with desire
so to come with your words,
that I have returned to the first proposed.
Now go, for one will is of both of us:
you leader, you lord, and you master".
So I said to him; and after that he moved,
I entered the high and savage path.
