In the middle of the journey of our life
I found myself in a dark forest,
because the straight path was lost.
Ah, how hard it is to say what it was
this wild, rough, and strong forest
that in my thought renews the fear!
So bitter is it that death is but a little more bitter;
but to treat of the good that I found there,
I will tell of the other things that I saw there.
I cannot well retell how I entered there,
so full of sleep was I at that point
that I abandoned the true way.
But when I had arrived at the foot of a hill,
there where that valley ended
which had pierced my heart with fear,
I looked up and saw his shoulders
dressed already in the rays of the planet
that leads others straight for every street.
Then the fear was a little quieted,
that had lasted in the lake of my heart
the night that I passed with so much pity.
And like one who, with weary breath,
having emerged from the sea onto the shore,
turns to the dangerous water and looks at it,
so my soul, which was still fleeing,
turned back to look at the step
that never left anyone alive.
Then, after I had rested my weary body a little,
I set out again along the deserted shore,
so that the foot that was planted was always the lowest.
And behold, almost at the beginning of the steep ascent,
a light and very swift leopard,
that was covered with spotted fur;
and did not part from before my face,
rather, it so hindered my journey,
that I was about to turn back many times.
It was the beginning of the morning,
and the sun was rising with those stars
that were with him when the divine love
moved first those beautiful things;
so that it was a reason for me to hope well
of that beast with the cheerful fur
the hour of time and the sweet season;
but not so that it did not give me fear
the sight of a lion that appeared to me.
This seemed to be coming against me
with a high head and with rabid hunger,
so that it seemed that the air trembled of it.
And a she-wolf, laden with all desires
seemed in its thinness,
and had already made many people live miserably,
this gave me so much weight
with the fear that came out of her sight,
that I lost the hope of the height.
And such is he who willingly acquires,
and the time comes that makes him lose it,
that in all his thoughts he cries and saddens;
such did the beast without peace make me,
that, coming towards me, little by little
pushed me back to where the sun is silent.
While I was falling into a low place,
before my eyes was offered
he who for long silence seemed weak.
When I saw this one in the great desert,
"Have mercy on me", I shouted to him,
"whoever you are, or shadow or certain man!"
He answered me: "Not man, I was once a man"
and my parents were Lombards,
mantuans by homeland both.
I was born under Julius, even though it was late,
and I lived in Rome under the good Augustus
in the time of the false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that just
son of Anchises who came from Troy,
after the proud Ilium was burned.
But why do you return to so much boredom?
why don't you climb the delightful mountain
that is the beginning and cause of all joy.
"Now are you that Virgil and that source
that you spread of speaking so wide a river?"
I answered him with ashamed face.
"O honor and light of the other poets,
may the long study and great love that has made me seek your volume help me
that has made me seek your volume.
You are my teacher and my author,
you are the only one from whom I took
the beautiful style that has honored me.
See the beast for whom I turned;
help me from her, famous wise man,
that she makes my veins and wrists tremble."
"It is necessary for you to keep another journey"
he replied, then that he saw me crying,
"if you want to escape from this wild place;
because this beast, for which you cry,
does not allow others to pass by its way,
but so much it impedes him that it kills him;
and has a nature so malicious and wicked,
that never fills the greedy desire,
and after the meal has more hunger than before.
Many are the animals to which she marries,
and more will still be, until the greyhound
will come, that will make her die with sorrow.
This one will not eat earth nor pewter,
but wisdom, love and virtue,
and his nation will be between felt and felt.
Of that humble Italy will be health
for which died the virgin Camilla,
Euryalus and Turnus and Nisus of wounds.
This one will chase her through every town,
until he will have returned her to hell,
there from whence envy first separated her.
Therefore I think and discern for your good,
that you follow me, and I will be your guide,
and I will lead you from here to an eternal place;
where you will hear the desperate cries,
you will see the ancient grieving spirits,
who each cry to the second death;
and you will see people who are content
in the fire, because they hope to come
when they will come to the blessed people.
To which, then, if you will want to ascend,
a soul will be more worthy of this than I am:
I will leave you with her at my departure;
because that emperor who reigns there,
because I was rebellious to his law,
does not want that one comes to his city for me.
In all parts he reigns and there he rules;
there is his city and the high throne:
oh happy he whom he elects there!"
And I to him: "Poet, I beseech you
for that God whom you did not know,
so that I may flee this evil and worse,
that you lead me there where you just said,
yes so that I may see the gate of Saint Peter
and those whom you make so sad.
Then he moved, and I kept behind him.
